Add tutorial for generating time series data using node and node-postgres (#5)
crate/crate-tutorials: docs/generate-time-series/javascript.rst

.. _gen-ts-javascript:

==========================================
Generate time series data using Javascript
==========================================

This tutorial will show you how to generate some :ref:`experimental time series
data <gen-ts>` by sampling your `system load`_ using Javascript, specifically `Node.js`_.

.. SEEALSO::

    :ref:`gen-ts`

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Prerequisites
=============

CrateDB must be :ref:`installed and running <install-run>`.

> Make sure you're running up-to-date Node/npm.

Reviewer: can you separate out Node and npm?

e.g., on one line, say:

```
Make sure you're running up-to-date `Node`_  (we recommend X or higher)..
```

link the name "Node" to the Node homepage. and I'd include a recommended version

then for npm, how about including a line that shows you how to upgrade npm to the latest version using npm itself? you could then also add a small fix to the python tutorial that does the same with pip

(please also link the first instance of "npm" to the npm homepage)

Author: I honestly have no idea what would be the recommended version here. I have the latest installed but I didn't try the tutorial out on all the other node versions.

Reviewer: perhaps just this then:

```
Make sure you're running up-to-date `Node`_
```

The `node-postgres`_ driver is our officially supported driver for Javascript.

> With this in mind, use `npm`_ to install the `pg`_ library:

Reviewer: I think we can probably drop the bit about officially supporting it. that can probably be mentioned on the list of supported clients page. in this context, it's implicit, I think

how about something like this:

```
Use npm to install the `node-postgres`_ library:

[...]
```

here, I've used `node-postgres` in full in the prose, because it's easier to read and understand, but then switched to `pg` in the command, which hopefully is enough of an explanation for the reader that these two things are synonyms

thoughts?

Author: I think this makes sense, aye.

.. code-block:: console

    $ npm install pg

> The rest of this tutorial is designed for Node.js's `interactive REPL mode`_ so that

Reviewer: I think you can say "Node's". I realize "Node.js" is the full name, but we only really need to use the full name in the first instance we use it  (which you already have done)

you can experiment with the commands as you see fit. This tutorial also makes use of
libraries that operate with `Promises`_, and so starting the interactive node shell
with support for ``await`` is strongly advised:

.. code-block:: console

    $ node --experimental-repl-await

Use Javascript to read your system load
=======================================

Start an interactive Node session using the ``node`` command. You can read the current system 
load averages with the `os.loadavg`_ function::

    > const os = require('os')
    > os.loadavg()
    [ 0.9794921875, 1.08740234375, 0.97314453125 ]

> The function returns a triple of `numbers`_ corresponding the average system load over the

Reviewer: missing a "to" before the "the average"

can you switch to using the phrasing used for the python tutorial, which includes spelling out the numbers under 10 (which is our house style), e.g.:

"... corresponding to the one minute average, five-minute average, and 15-minute average."

last 1, 5 and 15 minutes.

Set up CrateDB
==============

First, import the `pg`_ client::

    > const { Client } = require('pg')

> Then, `connect`_ to CrateDB, using the port for the `Postgres Wire Protocol`_::

Reviewer: ```
, using the port for the `Postgres Wire Protocol`_
```

is this bit necessary? it seems to me that it would be implied. is the `port` argument even necessary in the command below?

Author: I suppose not - I just thought it's better to be explicit here than implicit, since the other tutorials use `4200`. I can remove it if you think its necessary?

I'd prefer to keep the port argument in the connection string though, again, for the sake of explicitness.

Reviewer: hmm. I see. why do the other tutorials use 4200 (besides the obvious answer that that's how I wrote them lol)? I went with the defaults in the docs for those clients. does that imply those clients not using the postgresql wire protocol?

Author: Yep! The python client communicates over 4200, our HTTP port. Our own-written clients don't use the pg wire protocol.

    > const client = new Client({
    ...   user: 'crate',
    ...   host: 'localhost',
    ...   database: 'doc',
    ...   port: 5432,
    ... })
    > await client.connect()

> The client can also be initialised with a single connection string, if prefered::

Reviewer: for these tutorials, I want to pick one single way to do things, to keep things simple. then for other options, I would like to link through to the docs so people can explore other ways to do it

what do you think?

using the connection string might be the better option here, as it's more concise, and matches the python tutorial

Record your system load
=======================

With the table in place, you can start recording load averages.

The following command calls `os.loadavg`_ and uses the result triple as `input
values`_ for the `INSERT`_ query::

    > await client.query("INSERT INTO load (avg_1m, avg_5m, avg_15m) VALUES (?, ?, ?)", os.loadavg())

Press the up arrow on your keyboard and hit *Enter* to run the same command a
few more times.

When you're done, you can `SELECT`_ that data back out of CrateDB, like so::

    > client.query('SELECT * FROM load ORDER BY timestamp DESC', (err, res) => {
    ...   if (err) {
    ...       console.log(err.stack)
    ...     } else {
    ...       console.log(res.rows)
    ...     }
    ... })
    [ { timestamp: 2020-02-13T14:23:23.566Z,
        avg_1m: 0.83251953,
        avg_5m: 0.54785156,
        avg_15m: 0.2265625 },
      { timestamp: 2020-02-13T14:23:22.968Z,
        avg_1m: 0.90527344,
       avg_5m: 0.5571289,
        avg_15m: 0.22802734 },
      { timestamp: 2020-02-13T14:23:21.144Z,
        avg_1m: 0.90527344,
        avg_5m: 0.5571289,
        avg_15m: 0.22802734 } ]

Here we have recorded three sets of load averages with a corresponding

> timestamp. We can now close the connection::

Reviewer: make a new para:

```
When you're ready, you can close the connection::
```

this is in case the user wants to continue experimenting

however, I would also ask: is this necessary? would bad things happen if they don't close the connection? I realize it's probably good practice to do this in a real world app, but as this is a repl based tutorial, is it needed?

Author: Yeah, i think its probably fine to drop it.

    > await client.end()

Automate it
===========

Now we have the basics figured out, let's automate the data collection.

> Our approach will change a little bit here. We were previously using a `Client`_ to

Reviewer: I suspect that "client" can be lowercase throughout this para

Reviewer: I'd also maybe experiment with starting a new para at "We were" and seeing how it affects the flow. short n sweet paras are good for keeping people's attention

connect to and insert data into CrateDB. However, Clients are ephemeral, and once closed
they need to be recreated. However, creating a new Client requires a handshake with CrateDB, and

> this overhead cost can be prohibative if we are creating new clients rapidly.

Reviewer: I'm curious

if you look at the python tutorial, you will notice that I create a new connection each time the main loop evals. I did this primarily to mimic the behavior of the shell script tutorial

but then it occurred to me that keeping open a long-running connection invites problems. if a network issue arises, that while loop is going to start producing errors

I also didn't want to complicate the script too much by introducing connection management

so I would ask, which of the following sounds better to you:

1. drop the connection pool stuff for node. and just try to recreate the connection each time, mimicking the existing two tutorials (and building in a little resiliency -- though not much, because we're still not doing exception handling)

2. same as (1) but add exception handling 

3. keeping the connection pool use here, and updating the python tutorial to do something similar

4. keeping the connection pool use here, and not updating the python tutorial

Author: I would probably say 3. The crate-python driver already does pooling under the hood, see: https://github.com/crate/crate-python/blob/750fe0042c25b8c7a77ffb8b3afa096926f1fd8d/src/crate/client/http.py#L92 - when you do `connect` with crate-python, it gets a connection pool from urllib3 and manages the connection with that. With the postgres driver, we have to do that explicitly. In the python driver, a connection is actually a wrapper around a connection pool. It's probably not needed to create a new connection on every main loop of the python driver, actually.

Reviewer: cool okay. let's do that then

after we merge this pr, do you wanna submit a patch for the python tutorial as you have more familiarity with the client? (otherwise, happy to look into it myself!)

Author: Will do!

> Instead, we can use a `Connection Pool`_ to manage our connections. Create a new file called

Reviewer: new para at "Create a new file"

> Instead, we can use a `Connection Pool`_ to manage our connections. Create a new file called

Reviewer: would probably lowercase "connection pool", even though it's a class name, it also functions well as a generic noun phrase

``monitor-load.js``, like this:

.. code-block:: javascript

    const os = require('os')
    const { Pool } = require('pg')
    const pool = new Pool({
        user: 'crate',
        host: 'localhost',
        database: 'doc',

>         port: 5432,

Reviewer: we should make sure this matches whichever connection method you choose as the one to recommend for this tutorial (assuming you agree with my comment above)

    })

    function insert() {
        pool.query(
            "INSERT INTO load (avg_1m, avg_5m, avg_15m) VALUES (?, ?, ?)",
            os.loadavg(),
            (err, res) => {
                if (err) {
                    console.log(err.stack)
                } else {
                    console.log("INSERT OK")
                }

>             }

Reviewer: should we add a note about adding exception handling?

also: should we add this to the python example?

or, alternatively, should we strip this demo down so it's as basic as the python one with no exception handling at all. the downside of this is that the script is brittle for actual real-world use and we pass up the opportunity to introduce exception handling as a tool. the upside is: it keeps the tutorial simple and means that the end example isn't using too much extra code that hasn't been used in the repl sections

Author: Hm, I'm torn. On the one hand, without error handling the above could be written as a much simpler:

```
await pool.query("INSERT INTO load (avg_1m, avg_5m, avg_15m) VALUES (?, ?, ?)", os.loadavg())
console.log("INSERT OK")
```

But, on the other hand, I would also be tetchy about a tutorial that says, explicitly, "INSERT OK" without actually ensuring that the insert was ok. I think adding a little bit of exception handling to the python section is probably the best thing to do here. What do you think?

Reviewer: okay yes, you've convinced me. :D let's keep it, and let's patch the python tutorial afterward. do you want to do that or should I?

Author: I'll take care of it!

        )        
    }

    // Loop indefinitely
    async function loop() {
        while (true) {
            insert()
            console.log("Sleeping for 10 seconds...")
            await new Promise(r => setTimeout(r, 10000))
        }
    }

    loop()

Here, the script sleeps for 10 seconds after each sample. Accordingly, the time
series data will have a *resolution* of 10 seconds. You may want to configure
your script differently.

Run it from the command line, like so:

.. code-block:: console

    $ node monitor-load.js

>     INSERT OK

Reviewer: I am missing the "CONNECT OK", which I added to python so that it mimics the crash tutorial. haha. but it's not necessary. and whether it should even be here or not is going to be answered by your answer to my above questions :)

Author: I think letting the pool handle it is fine - if connection is wrong, the user will know. If the connection is fine, they will see some insert stuff. Not sure if its really necessary.

    Sleeping for 10 seconds...
    INSERT OK
    Sleeping for 10 seconds...
    INSERT OK
    Sleeping for 10 seconds...

As this runs, you should see the table filling up in the CrateDB Admin UI:

.. image:: ../_assets/img/generate-time-series/rows.png

Lots of freshly generated time series data, ready for use.

> 

Reviewer: please add an extra empty newline to separate off the list of links

.. _Connection Pool: https://node-postgres.com/api/pool
.. _CrateDB Admin UI: https://crate.io/docs/clients/admin-ui/en/latest/
.. _create a table: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/general/ddl/create-table.html
.. _input values: https://node-postgres.com/features/queries#Parameterized%20query
.. _INSERT: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/general/dml.html#inserting-data
.. _interactive REPL mode: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/learning-node-2nd/9781491943113/ch04.html
.. _os.loadavg: https://nodejs.org/api/os.html#os_os_loadavg
.. _Postgres Wire Protocol: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/interfaces/postgres.html
.. _Promises: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise
.. _Node.js: https://nodejs.org/en/
.. _node-postgres: https://nodejs.org/en/
.. _npm: https://www.npmjs.com/
.. _numbers: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number
.. _pg: https://www.npmjs.com/package/pg
.. _SELECT: https://crate.io/docs/crate/reference/en/latest/general/dql/selects.html
.. _system load: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Load_(computing)

> .. _time series: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_series

Reviewer: please sort this list of links alphabetically (case insensitive)

> 

Reviewer: please trim these trailing empty newlines down to one empty newline

.. _gen-ts-javascript:

==========================================

> Generate time series data using Javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate time series data using JavaScript
```

==========================================

This tutorial will show you how to generate some :ref:`experimental time series

> data <gen-ts>` by consuming telemetry data from the `International Space Station`_

Reviewer: maybe "[...] how to generate some experimental time series data from information about the International Space Station (ISS) [...]"

> using Javascript, specifically `Node.js`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using Javascript (specifically, `Node.js`_).
```

.. SEEALSO::

    :ref:`gen-ts`

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

Prerequisites
=============

CrateDB must be :ref:`installed and running <install-run>`.

Make sure you're running up-to-date `Node`_.

> Also make sure you're running up-to-date `npm`_. To upgrade npm:

Reviewer: how about:

```
Make sure you're running an up-to-date `Node`_ installation.

Then, upgrade to the latest `npm`_ version:
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ npm install -g npm@latest

> Use npm to install the `node-postgres`_ library:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the `node-postgres`_ and `Axios`_ libraries:
```

.. code-block:: console

>     $ npm install pg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $ npm install pg axios
```

You will also be using the `Axios`_ library to make HTTP queries. Install the ``axios``
library with npm:

.. code-block:: console

    $ npm install axios

> 

Reviewer: delete this? I've integrated it into the command above for brevity

> Both the ``axios`` and ``node-postgres`` libraries operate using `Promises`_. Promises are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``node-postgres`` and ``axios` libraries both use `Promises`_. Promises are
```

a way of encapsulating the eventual result of an asynchronous operation. Both ``axios``, when
retrieving content from a URL, and ``node-postgres``, when connecting and querying a database,

> use Promises as a way of asynchronously doing those operations.

Reviewer: would delete the bit starting "Both"

if you want to include info about what they use promises for you could reword the first sentence more like this:

"The ``node-postgres`` and ``axios` libraries both use `Promises`_ when performing network operations."

> If you are not familiar with asynchronous operations and Promises, Mozilla have written a

Reviewer: move this into a SEEALSO block

you could also rephrase this slightly:

"If you're not familiar with asynchronous operations and Promises, check out Mozilla's `detailed guide`_."

`detailed guide`_ on the subject.

Most of this tutorial is designed for Node's `interactive REPL mode`_ so that
you can experiment with the commands as you see fit. Since both the libraries you will import
use Promises, you should start ``node`` with support for the `await`_ operator:

.. code-block:: console

    $ node --experimental-repl-await

> Use Javascript to get to get ISS telemetry data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use JavaScript to get to get ISS telemetry data
```

===============================================

> You will be consuming telemetry data from `Open Notify`_, a service which provides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can get telemetry data from `Open Notify`_, a service which provides
```

> a simple API to consume data from NASA. One of these data points is the current location

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a simple API to consume data from NASA. Specifically, the current location
```

> of the International Space Station. The endpoint for these data can be found at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the International Space Station. The endpoint for this data is
```

`<http://api.open-notify.org/iss-now.json>`_.

> Start an interactive Node session using the ``node`` command. You can read the current

Reviewer: I would drop the "using the `node` command" bit, because you've already detailed how to do this above. but, if you want to keep it, I would add the `--experimental-repl-await` again here

Reviewer: new para at "You"

> position of the ISS by consuming this endpoint, using ``axios``::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
position of the ISS with an HTTP GET request to this endpoint, using ``axios``::
```

    > const axios = require('axios').default;
    > let response = await axios.get('http://api.open-notify.org/iss-now.json')
    > response.data
    { iss_position: { longitude: '111.5276', latitude: '9.7319' },
    timestamp: 1582101199,
    message: 'success' }

> The endpoint returns a JSON payload consisting of ``iss_position``, which is composed of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The endpoint returns a JSON payload, which contains an``iss_position`` object with ``latitude`` and ``longitude`` data.
``

``latitude`` and ``longitude``, as well as some other metadata.

> You can encapsulate this within a single function to return only the longitude and latitude as a `WKT`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can encapsulate this operation with a function that returns longitude and latitude as a `WKT`_
```

string::

    > async function position() {
    ...     let response = await axios.get('http://api.open-notify.org/iss-now.json')
    ...     return `POINT (${response.data.iss_position.longitude} ${response.data.iss_position.latitude})`
    ... }

When you run this function, it should return your point string::

    > await position()
    'POINT (-22.7857 49.3332)'

Set up CrateDB
==============

First, import the `pg`_ client::

    > const { Client } = require('pg')

Then `connect`_ to CrateDB, using the port for the `Postgres Wire Protocol`_::

    > const client = new Client({connectionString: 'postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/doc'})
    > await client.connect()

Then finally `create a table`_ suitable for writing ISS position coordinates::

    > var query = `

>     ...     CREATE TABLE iss_position (

Reviewer: perhaps we should use "iss" instead of "iss_position". keeps things simple, and allows for us to maybe expand on what data we include in the future

    ...         timestamp TIMESTAMP GENERATED ALWAYS AS CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    ...         position GEO_POINT)`
    > await client.query(query)

In the `CrateDB Admin UI`_, you should see the new table when you navigate to
the *Tables* screen using the left-hand navigation menu:

.. image:: ../_assets/img/generate-time-series/table.png

Record the ISS position
=======================

With the table in place, you can start recording the position of the ISS.

> The following command calls your ``position`` function and inserts the resulting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following command calls the ``position`` function and inserts the resulting
```

> position into your table using an `INSERT`_ query::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
into the table using an `INSERT`_ query::
```

> position into your table using an `INSERT`_ query::

Reviewer: perhaps:

"The following command calls the ``position`` function and `INSERTS`_ the result
into the ``iss_position`` table:"

    > await client.query("INSERT INTO iss_position (position) VALUES (?)", [await position()])

Press the up arrow on your keyboard and hit *Enter* to run the same command a
few more times.

When you're done, you can `SELECT`_ that data back out of CrateDB, like so::

    > let result = await client.query('SELECT * FROM iss_position')
    > result.rows
    [ { timestamp: 2020-02-21T09:44:12.754Z,
        position: { x: -13.3941, y: 50.8954 } },
    { timestamp: 2020-02-21T09:44:16.003Z,
        position: { x: -13.0547, y: 50.9348 } },
    { timestamp: 2020-02-21T09:44:17.035Z,
        position: { x: -12.9576, y: 50.9458 } }]

Here you have recorded three sets of ISS position coordinates.

Automate it
===========

Now you have the basics figured out, let's automate the data collection. This will

> change your approach a little bit.

Reviewer: "This will require a change of approach."

> You were previously using a `client`_ to connect to and insert data into CrateDB.

Reviewer: "Previously, we used a `client`_"

However, clients are ephemeral, and once closed they need to be recreated.

> Creating a new client requires a handshake with CrateDB, and

Reviewer: looks like a hard wrapping issue here (line ends too early)

this overhead cost can be prohibitive if you are creating new clients rapidly.

> Instead, you can use a `connection pool`_ to manage your connections.

Reviewer: perhaps add a brief sentence to this saying how connection pools address the problem

Create a new file called ``iss-position.js``, like this:

> .. code-block:: javascript

Reviewer: can you add a few more comments to the code in this file?
